# Oral Session 2: Brazilian Portuguese

## Phonatory and acoustic gradualness of devoiced vowels in Brazilian Portuguese
### Maria Cantoni

Vowels, amongst other sounds called sonorants, are usually produced with vibrating vocal folds. Despite of this overall tendency, many languages across the world present both voiced and voiceless vowels, with or without phonological contrast (LADEFOGED; MADDIESON, 1996). Recent studies have shown that in Brazilian Portuguese (BP) devoiced vowels can occur as allophonic variations of regularly voiced vowels (MENESES, 2012 inter alia). This variation is usually favored by weak prosodic positions, such as postonic syllables. Furthermore it has been argued that, as in many other languages, vowel devoicing may involve a progressive scale, rather than a well-defined oposition between voiced and voiceless segments. The present study advances this issue, by considering the phonatory characteristics of devoiced vowels. A dataset of four postonic syllables with three different vowels in twelve BP words produced by five native speakers was evaluated, consisting of both acoustic and electroglottographic (EGG) signals. The EGG signal is obtained by electrodes positioned externally in the larynx during speech and represents the time variations of the contact area of the vocal folds (VIEIRA, 1997). It can be straightforwardly used to access voicing and phonatory properties. The results show that, regarding the span of voicelessness, devoiced vowels in BP can be indeed partially or fully devoiced. Additionally, devoiced vowels may be associated to articulatory weakening as well as phonatory adjustments such as breathiness. They may be further accompanied by coarticulation with the preceding consonant. The results presented suggest that devoiced vowels are involved in a gradual progression from fully voicing to voicelessness or deletion which can have an impact on the language's templates for syllable construction.

LADEFOGED, Peter; MADIESON, Ian. The sounds of the world's languages. Oxford: Blackwell, 1996.

MENESES, Francisco de Oliveira. As vogais desvozeadas no Português Brasileiro: investigação acústico-articulatória. 2012. Dissertação de Mestrado. Campinas, UNICAMP, Instituto de Estudos da Linguagem.

VIEIRA, Maurílio Nunes. 1997. Automated measures of dysphonias and the phonatory effects of asymmetries in the posterior larynx. Doctoral Thesis. University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh.


# Morphological awareness in writing acquisition by deaf students
## Daniela Mara Lima Oliveira, Andreia Chagas Rocha Toffolo

The poor performance in reading and writing skills by deaf people has worried teachers and researchers working in this area (PEREIRA, 2014; ALMEIDA et al., 2015). Results of research on Portuguese language learning have shown that most of these students, even in more advanced grades, have a standard reading level typical of the initial grades (CAPOVILLA, 2004). The fact that they do not hear makes it difficult to familiarize them with language spoken in the country, which, in turn, directly influences the development of previous phonological analysis skills that allow the learner to discover the alphabetic principle. Therefore, it has been proposed the teaching / learning process focus on word recognition with emphasis on the exploration of orthographic tracks. Following this path, authors such as Nunes et al. (2006), Koppenhaver and Wollak (2014), Trussell et al., (2017) present satisfactory results considering the role of morphological awareness (CM) in reading and writing comprehension by the deaf student. Morphological awareness is the ability to manipulate and reflect about elements that carry meaning within the word (morphemes) intentionally. In this work, we aim to present a reflection on the already published analyzes about the subject in BP and to evaluate the possibility of creating an intervention program for Brazilian deaf readers, that can be used as a bilingual didactic strategy in the teaching of Portuguese Language as a second language for the deaf people.

# Processual units in translation and comprehension tasks: an experimental approach
## Matheus Freitas

This paper aims at presenting and discussing the results from an experiment which investigated the status of processual units in translation and comprehension tasks. Our main objective was to assess, during text processing, whether the whole text or individual words function as processual units. We thus contrasted two aspects of text processing: informational progression and individual words. Jensen (2009) considers the concepts of textual complexity and processual difficulty, respectively, as an objective and a subjective approach to the text properties. Complexity is thus related to factual criteria concerning the text. Difficulty is related to the reader’s/translator’s perception of a text. Then, it is assumed that objective text properties affect subjective experience during translation and comprehension. Exemplar Models (JOHNSON, 1997; PIERREHUMBERT, 2001; BYBEE, 2002) consider that words function as processing units, being the locus of grammatical development. An experiment was carried out in order to examine how textual complexity variation affected text processing. Using a combination of eye-tracking and keystroke logging, we analysed translation and comprehension tasks performed by eight translation students from the Federal University of Ouro Preto – MG, Brazil. We consider that gaze (and typing) behaviour can serve as an indicator of cognitive effort during text processing (JUST; CARPENTER, 1980).  The following data were collected and analysed: task duration; fixation count; fixation mean duration; pause frequency and pause duration. Texts labelled as less complex according to informational progress criteria presented higher difficulty levels than texts labelled as more complex. The analysed data also suggested the participants had more comprehension and translation problems with shorter units, such as words, instead of information progression problems, which are related to the text as a whole. For the translation tasks, the distribution of time and visual attention was higher to the source text area than to the target text area. With this research, we seek to collaborate on experimental research in language – especially when it comes to methodological development – with emphasis on works that use eye-tracking as a method for data collection. In view of the problem assessed in this analysis, we consider important to put more emphasis on other levels of linguistic processing, such as phonological patterns. For future work, we then propose an investigation which contrasts words and phonological patterns – such as the syllable or individual segments – as linguistic processing units.

Keywords: Experimental Linguistics; Translation Process; Cognitive Effort; Exemplar Models; Eye-tracking.

References:

BYBEE, J. 2002. Phonological evidence for exemplar storage of multiword sequences. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, v. 24, n. 2, 2002. p. 215-221.

JENSEN, K.T.H. Indicators of text complexity. In S. Göpferich, A.L. Jakobsen and I. Mees, eds. Behind the Mind. Copenhagen Studies in Language 37. Copenhagen: Samfundslitteratur, 2009. p. 61-80.

JOHNSON, K. Speech perception without speaker normalization: An exemplar model. In: JOHNSON, K.; MULLENIX, J. W. (eds.). Talker Variability in Speech Processing. San Diego: Academic Press, 1997. p. 145-165.
JUST, M.A.; CARPENTER, P.A. A theory of reading: from eye fixations to comprehension. Psychological Review 87/4, 1980. p. 329-354. 

PIERREHUMBERT, J. Exemplar dynamics: word frequency, lenition and contrast. In BYBEE, J.; HOOPER, P. (Ed.). Frequency and the emergency of linguistic structure. Amsterdam: J. Benjamins, 2001. p. 137-157.


# Impoliteness as emergent behaviour: an analysis of the talk show Hell ́s Kitchen Brasil
## Daniela Cristina Dias Menezes

The objective of this presentation is to analyse the emergence of impoliteness in the interaction between the chef and judge of the cooking television show Hell´s Kitchen Brasil (season four) and its contestants. Impoliteness is sanctioned in this context, as viewers expect the chef to be a severe critic of contestants´ dishes. Furthermore, as each episode involves the elimination of one participant, the designers of the show create situations that enhance individual flaws and maximize the rank of power between the chef and the contestants.

# Intervocalic Tap Lenition in Brazilian Portuguese
## Wellington Araujo Mendes Junior

This investigation reports on findings of tap lenition in several states of Brazil. Examples of intervocalic tap lenition include the variation observed in para [pa.ɾə] ~ [pa] and in brasileiro [bɾa.zi.lej.ɾʊ] ~ [bɾa.zi.lej.ʊ]. The corpus was collected through the website www.fonologia.org and it is made up of speech recordings resulting from the reading of a text from the project “Sibilants and Rhotics of Brazilian Portuguese” (CNPq, 484590/2013-8). The research presents insights on the consequences of segmental loss for phonological representations. Investigations were mainly based on the assumptions of the Exemplar Theory (JOHNSON, 1997; PIERREHUMBERT, 2001, 2003). Since tap lenition is an optional phenomenon in Brazilian Portuguese, this investigation sought to assess which conditions favor or inhibit such phenomenon, while trying to acoustically assess whether tap loss is gradient or abrupt. In order carry out these tasks, two data analyses were performed: the categorical and the acoustic one. The categorical analysis evaluated the variables (1) tonicity, (2) number of syllables, (3) adjacent vowels, (4) lexical frequency, (5) lexical item, (6) sex, (7) individual and (9) geographical border. The data was submitted to the statistical program R (R CORE TEAM, 2013) and the following factors were significant in the statistical model: tonicity, number of syllables, following vowel, lexical frequency and geographical boarder. Furthermore, it was reported that intervocalic tap lenition occurs among speakers of, at least, 12 states of Brazil. This provides evidences that intervocalic tap lenition is an emergent and recurrent phenomenon in Brazilian Portuguese. As for the gradient or abrupt implementation of tap lenition, results suggest that such phenomenon is gradient. In addition, results indicate that tap lenition implies gradual loss of lexical duration. As for the impact of the intervocalic tap lenition on mental representations, evidence was presented for the relevance of the phonetic detail in the implementation of lenition, corroborating principles of the Exemplar Theory.
Key words: intervocalic tap, lenition, gradiency, Exemplar Theory.


