# Oral Session 4: Prosody

## Prosodic description of the short parenthetical information unit in spoken Brazilian Portuguese
### Saulo Mendes Santos, Giulia Bossaglia

This work presents the first results of a prosodic description of a subtype of the information unit of Parenthesis (PAR), the short modal PAR, based on a representative sample of the Informal section of the C-ORAL-BRASIL corpus (Raso & Mello 2012) of spoken Brazilian Portuguese (PB). According to the adopted theoretical framework, the Language into Act Theory (Cresti & Moneglia 2005; Moneglia & Raso 2014), PAR is defined as an inserted semantic information, compositional to the rest of the utterance, with metalinguistic, metanarrative or modal value, restricting and clarifying how a part of the locutive content should be interpreted by the addressee. Previous research carried out on the Italian C-ORAL-ROM corpus indicates that the prosodic profile of PAR is characterized by changes in fundamental frequency (f0), intensity, and speech rate with respect to the rest of the utterance, and that PAR can be found in any position of the utterance, except for the initial one (Tucci 2010). Santos & Bossaglia (2018, in preparation) have also found out that short PAR tokens have a slope to bear a modal function and that several tokens are similar to what has been described in the literature as “reduced parenthetical clauses” (Schneider 2007). For this study, PARs were extracted from a sample of the C-ORAL-BRASIL corpus, searching for typical fillers of reduced parenthetical clauses – expressions such as "I think", "I would say”, “I suppose”, “I hope”, "it seems" – enclosed by two prosodic breaks, thus fulfilling an exclusive tone and information unit. Then, 30 tokens bearing modal function and distribution of PAR were randomly chosen. In order to describe the profile of short modal PAR, the following prosodic parameters were measured and calculated: a) mean f0 of the final or initial part of the information units neighbouring PAR (from the last stressed syllable included to the prosodic break or vice versa); b) mean f0 of PAR; c) ratio of speech rate (phonological content) of PAR to the ones of neighbouring units; d) ratio of speech rate (phonetic content) of PAR to the ones of neighbouring units; e) ratio of f0 range of PAR to f0 range of the host utterance; f) ratio of f0 range of PAR to f0 ranges of neighbouring units; g) ratio of intensity range of PAR to intensity range of the utterance. Furthermore, two non-prosodic variables were considered: a) speaker’s sex; and b) the distribution of PAR within the utterance (medial and final). Partial results suggest that short modal PAR has a prosodic profile with a higher speech rate and a lower f0 range with respect to its neighbouring units and that mean f0 of PAR also varies depending on the position of the token within the utterance, being lower in final position.

REFERÊNCIAS

CRESTI, E.; MONEGLIA, M. (Ed.). (2005). C-ORAL-ROM. Integrated reference corpora for spoken romance languages. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

MONEGLIA, M.; RASO, T. (2014). Notes on the Language into Act Theory. In: RASO, T.; MELLO, H. (Ed.), Spoken corpora and linguistics studies. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins, p. 468-494.

RASO, T.; MELLO, H. (2012). C-ORAL-BRASIL: corpus de referência do português brasileiro falado informal. I. Belo Horizonte: UFMG.

SANTOS, S.; BOSSAGLIA, G. (2018). Morphosyntactic, prosodic, functional and distributional description of the information unit of Parenthesis in spoken Brazilian Portuguese. In preparation.

SCHNEIDER, S. (2007). Reduced parenthetical clauses as mitigators: A corpus study of spoken French, Italian and Spanish. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

TUCCI, I. (2010). Obiter dictum: la funzione informativa delle unità parentetiche. In: LEONI, F. A. et al. (Ed.). Atti del Convegno internazionale G.S.C.P. La comunicazione parlata, Naples: Università degli Studi di Napoli L'Orientale, 2010, v. I, p. 635-654.


## Prosodic boundaries and automatic intonation analysis
### Waldemar Ferreira Netto, Marcus Vinicius Moreira Martins

The purpose of this research is to establish criteria for the automatic phrasal segmentation of Brazilian Portuguese. In previous works we have defined that the intonation can be understood as a system composed of two fundamental elements: the middle tone, extracted from time-accumulated averages and two lateral intervals of maximum and minimum F0 values, which establish references for emphatic and emotional intonation analyzes. Values below or beyond these thresholds are considered Emphasis/Focus (E/F). Although the method is functional for the segmentation and analysis of phenomena at the syllabic level, the replication of the same method is not functional for segmentation of lexical or syntactic items, therefore prosodic boundaries or sentence boundaries are not detected by the automatic analysis proposed by us. For the analysis in this paper, only phonetic and phonological criteria were considered to determine the prosodic boundaries of segments, regardless of whether they behave as whole sentences or not, so the syntactic criterion was not considered at this stage. Thirty samples of spontaneous speech, from male voices, taken from headlines of radio transmissions are analyzed in 7 parameters: intonation (movement), direction of intonation (direction), target of intonation (target), interruption of tonal rhythm (pause> 0.05ms), UBI elongation (stretching), correlation between mean tone and total mean tone (correlation), difference between mean and total mean tone (difference) and intonation dispersion above the mean pitch (F/E). The prosodic breaks would be defined: (i) by the occurrence of only one significant parameter (p≤0.05); (ii) by a set of parameters that are also significant. The analysis of these parameters demonstrated that for the definition of boundaries it would be necessary: (a) the occurrence of an upward interval with a value greater than F/Esup between the moments z(t-1) and z(t), where the moment z(t-1) is less than or equal to F/Einf (t)  - significant parameters: tonal target, intonational movement, difference between mean and total mean tone, and intonation dispersion above mean pitch (F/ E); (b) interruption of tonal rhythm with duration greater than or equal to twice the duration defined for a pause - significant parameters: interruption of tonal rhythm; (c) interruption of the tonal rhythm with duration greater than or equal to the lowest value defined for pause followed by a tonal range greater than or equal to F/ Esup or less than or equal to F/Einf - significant parameters: interruption of tonal rhythm and intonation dispersion above the midtone (F/E). Further research is necessary to characterize the types of boundaries determined by the parameters presented here, however, it is noted that only the combination of parameters was able to determine prosodic boundaries.



