# Oral Session 3: Second Language

## Non-native speech perception: reanalyzing PAM-L2 from the perspective of cognition, acoustic-articulatory gesture, and indirect realism
### Reiner Vinicius Perozzo, Ubiratã Kickhöfel Alves

This presentation addresses the phonic perception of non-native languages and aims to review the principles of the Perceptual Assimilation Model for Second Language Speech Learning [PAM-L2 (BEST; TYLER, 2007)] with respect to its cognitive, phonological and philosophical tenets. According to this model, (i) the perception of non-native speech disregards any cognitive mechanisms related to mental representations or inferential processes, since our senses act as our own perceptual systems; (ii) the unit for analyzing perceptual events, in terms of speech, corresponds to the articulatory gesture (BROWMAN; GOLDSTEIN, 1989, 1992), which develops from the notion that coordinated articulations leads to contrastive lexical knowledge; and (iii) we have direct access to the information available in the world, bearing in mind that the surrounding environment affords invariant structures that are directly detected by the perceiver. We argue that these premises are limited and inconsistent with the research object of the authors, considering their own theoretical framework: (i’) if mental representations and inferential processes are not involved in the perception of non-native speech, then we are not able to capture perceptual phenomena as relying upon an intellectual basis, a statement that intrinsically collides with the latest body of research conducted in neurosciences and neuropsychology; (ii’) if speech perception assumes gestures as linguistic primes, then a sharp boundary between phonetic and phonological information should not be posited, since phonetic and phonological properties are brought together in a common mental-physical domain; and (iii’) if non-native speech crucially depends on native speech categories, and native linguistic knowledge acts as a filter for non-native sound contrasts, then non-native speech elements cannot not be accessed directly. We raise these arguments as a counterpoint to the principles of PAM-L2 and state that the model should be glimpsed from an alternative point of view. Firstly, we argue that the perceptual event is essentially a cognitive phenomenon (KANDEL, 2014; GAZZANIGA et al., 2012), created and managed by the brain, which involves abstractions, mental representations and inferences about the objects of the world. Secondly, we state that an acoustic-articulatory treatment (ALBANO, 2001) to the gestural unit is more appropriate to the perception of non-native phonic elements, differing from the articulatory treatment (BROWMAN; GOLDSTEIN, 1989, 1992) that is originally conveyed by the model. Thirdly, opposing direct realism (J. GIBSON, 1966, 1986; FOWLER, 1986), we adopt the indirect realist position (JACKSON, 1977, 2010; LOWE, 1981) as the one that encompasses the perception of non-native phonic units more adequately. Such an alternative version of the tenets of PAM-L2 also have an impact on issues such as the design, the type of knowledge tested (either native or nonnative language) and the purpose of each perceptual task to be used in a laboratory or similar environment. By revising these three domains of PAM-L2, we aim to propose a new version of the model that seems more coherent regarding the compatibility of cognitive, phonic and philosophical aspects of speech perception and language development.
KEYWORDS: acoustic-articulatory gesture; cognition; indirect realism; nonnative phonic perception.

REFERENCES:
ALBANO, E. O gesto e suas bordas: Esboço de fonologia acústico-articulatória do português brasileiro. Campinas: Mercado de Letras, 2001.
BEST, C.; TYLER, M. Nonnative and second-language speech perception: Commonalities and complementarities. In: BOHN, O.; MUNRO, M. (Orgs.). Language experience in second language speech learning: In honor of James Emil Flege. Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2007, p. 13-34.
BROWMAN, C.; GOLDSTEIN, L. Articulatory gestures as phonological units. Haskins Laboratories Status Report on Speech Research, v. 100, p. 69-101, 1989. 
BROWMAN, C.; GOLDSTEIN, L. Articulatory phonology: An overview. Haskins Laboratories Status Report on Speech Research, v. 112, p. 23-42, 1992.
FOWLER, C. An event approach to the study of speech perception from a direct-realist perspective. Journal of Phonetics. v. 14, p. 3-28, 1986.
GAZZANIGA, M.; HEATHERTON, T.; HALPERN, D.; HEINE, S. Psychological Science. Nova Iorque: W.W. Norton & Company, 2012.
GIBSON, J. The ecological approach to visual perception. Nova Iorque: Psychology Press, 1986.
GIBSON, J. The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Miffin, 1966.
JACKSON, F. Perception. Nova Iorque: Cambridge University Press, 1977.
JACKSON, F. Representative realism. In: DANCY, J.; SOSA, E.; STEUP, M. (Eds.). A companion to epistemology. 2. ed. Malden: Blackwell, 2010. p. 702-705.
KANDEL, E. Das células nervosas à cognição: As representações internas de espaço e ação. In: KANDEL, E.; SCHWARTZ, J.; JESSEL, T.; SIEGELBAUM, S.; HUDSPETHET, A. (Eds.). Princípios de neurociências. 5. ed. Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2014. p. 327-344.
LOWE, J. Indirect perception and sense data. The Philosophical Quarterly, v. 31, n. 125, p. 330-342, 1981.


## The development of speech rhythm of English by Brazilian learners: a research proposal
### Ronaldo Mangueira Lima Júnior

There are several prosodic differences between English and Brazilian Portuguese that pose difficulties for Brazilian learners of English both in production and perception. Concerning rhythm, the impression that these two languages have distinct patterns has long been reported (Lloyd James, 1940), initially as the former having similar interstress intervals and the latter similar syllable intervals (Pike, 1945). However, despite the unchallenged impression that these two languages present distinct rhythmic patterns, such isochrony has never been found in acoustic measurements (e.g. DEMANRIQUE & Signorini, 1983; Lea, 1974; O’Connor, 1965; Shen & Peterson, 1962). This has led scientists to look for other acoustic cues to justify such impression, with three current models displaying different levels of success in arranging the so-called stress-timed and syllable-timed languages (such as English and Brazilian Portuguese, respectively) within a gradient classification – as opposed to the initial dichotomic proposals. The first one was Ramus, Nespor and Mehler’s (1999) proposal in which they plotted the data of eight different languages using the relative duration of vocalic intervals in one axis and standard deviation of consonantal intervals in the other, being able to position languages according to their impressionistic stress-timing or syllable-timing classification, yet in a gradient, more realistic, manner. A similar result was achieved by Grabe and Low (2002) as they analyzed the PVIs (Pairwise Variability Indices) of vocalic and intervocalic intervals in 18 languages. Finally, both O’Dell and Nieman (1999) and Barbosa (2002, 2006) have used a general mathematical model, namely the Coupled-Oscillator Model, to successfully classify the so-called stress-timed and syllable-timed languages in a gradient fashion using one single parameter: the coupling strength. From a dynamic perspective of linguistic rhythm, this model assigns vowel duration to the syllabic oscillator, and stress to the stress oscillator. It is possible to mathematically estimate the coupling strength from the speech signal, and thus infer which oscillator has more influence over the other both among different languages and among different varieties (dialects, elocution rates, recording tasks, etc.) within the same language. Even though all these models have already been used to account for the rhythm of several languages, very little work has been done with the two first models and none with the third one on the speech of second or foreign languages. Therefore, the research project herein proposed aims at using these three models (Ramus et al’s 1999, Grabe & Low 2002, Barbosa 2006) to investigate the development of the rhythmic patterns of English as a Foreign Language as spoken by Brazilian undergraduate students of English. To do so, three corpora of the oral production of 10 Brazilian undergraduate students of English and one corpus of oral production of 10 native speakers of English will be used. The three corpora of the learners will be: oral production in English at the beginning of their second semester of college studies, oral production in English in their fifth semester of college studies, and oral production in Portuguese. This way, the data of English-L1, Brazilian Portuguese-L1 and English-L2 (in two longitudinal moments) will be used to run the three aforementioned models. Besides its main goal of investigating the development of rhythmic patterns of English by Brazilian learners, this study can potentially also be used to compare and evaluate the three current models of speech rhythm. The data haven’t been collected yet, and the opportunity to present this project proposal and receive suggestions and feedback before it begins will be of paramount importance to its success.

REFERENCES
Barbosa, P. A. (2002). Explaining cross-linguistic rhythmic variability via a coupled-oscillator model of rhythm production. In Speech Prosody 2002, International Conference.
Barbosa, P. A. (2006). Incursões em torno do ritmo da fala. São Paulo: Pontes.
DEMANRIQUE, A. M. B., & Signorini, A. (1983). Segmental duration and rhythm in Spanish. Journal of Phonetics, 11(2), 117–128.
Grabe, E., & Low, E. L. (2002). Durational variability in speech and the rhythm class hypothesis. Papers in Laboratory Phonology, 7(515–546).
Lea, W. A. (1974). Prosodic aids to speech recognition: IV A general strategy for prosodically-guided speech understanding. . St. Paul, Minnesota: Sperry Univac.
Lloyd James, A. (1940). Speech signals in telephony. London: Sir I. Pitman & sons, Limited.
O’Connor, J. D. (1965). The perception of time intervals. London: University College London.
O’Dell, M., & Nieminen, T. (1999). Coupled oscillator model of speech rhythm. In Proceedings of the XIVth international congress of phonetic sciences (Vol. 2, pp. 1075–1078).
Pike, K. L. (1945). The intonation of American English. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Ramus, F., Nespor, M., & Mehler, J. (1999). Correlates of linguistic rhythm in the speech signal. Cognition, 73(3), 265–292.
Shen, Y., & Peterson, G. G. (1962). Isochronism in English. Occasional Papers, (9), 36.

## Language Attrition in Initial Plosives in Bilingual and Trilingual Speakers in an L1-dominant Environment
### Laura Castilhos Schereschewsky, Ubiratã Kickhöfel Alves; Felipe Flores Kupske

This study aims to discuss language attrition in the Voice Onset Time (VOT) production patterns of Brazilian Portuguese (BP) (L1) initial voiceless plosives by bilingual (BP and English) and trilingual (BP, English and German) speakers in an L1-dominant environment. In order to discuss this phenomenon, we analyzed the VOT (the time interval between the release of a plosive consonant and the beginning of the following vocal vibration) of the bilabial, alveolar and velar voiceless plosives (/p/, /t/, /k/), in word-initial position, in the three referred languages. The study analyzed data from 40 participants. The experimental groups consisted of 10 bilinguals (BP - English) and 10 trilinguals (BP, English, German), all native speakers of Portuguese, residents of the city of Porto Alegre (Southern Brazil). Control data were obtained from 10 monolinguals of Portuguese, also residents of Porto Alegre, and 10 monolinguals of English, residents of London (cf. KUPSKE, 2016). The participants individually took part in reading tasks of carrier sentences in their known languages, such as "Eu diria _", in Portuguese, "I would say _", in English, and "Ich sage _", in German, followed by words beginning with the target consonants. As results, we found significant differences between the L1 and the additional languages of each of the plurilingual groups; however, we did not find differences between the L2 and L3 of the trilingual group. When compared to the English monolingual control group, the Brazilian participants did not show significant differences for /t/ and /k/ in English, thus indicating a native-like pattern. When compared to the BP monolingual control group, the two plurilingual groups showed significantly different productions. These results suggest the occurrence of attrition even in non-dominant L2 or L3 environments, also providing evidence in favor of the multidirectionality of language transfer and the importance of typology in the development of additional languages. Furthermore, these results reinforce the dynamic character of language, predicted by the view of language as a Complex Adaptive System (CAS) (LARSEN-FREEMAN & CAMERON, 2008; BECKNER et al., 2009; DE BOT et al., 2013).


