# Poster Session 2

## Brazilian Portuguese and English Rhotic Interphonology
### Miriam Gurgel Da Silva, Clerton Luiz Felix Barboza 

The objective of this research is to discuss the typology of Brazilian Portuguese (BP) and English rhotics concerning their specific place and manner of articulation, as well as possible pathways to interphonology construction. According to Ladefoged & Maddieson (1996) rhotics are particularly associated to much acoustic and articulatory variation. Owing to their phonetic and phonological nature, both between and within languages, rhotics are described as a complex class to be investigated. This study is the first step in order to carry out an acoustic experimental research, aiming at better understanding of rhotic interphonology by Brazilian learners of English as a foreign language (EFL), in Northeastern Brazil. Although many researches have been devoted to rhotics interphonology, it is still an open area of investigation in literature, since no study involving Brazilian EFL learners from Rio Grande do Norte has ever been conducted. This study tries to answer the following research question: which are possible pathways for BP and English rhotics to construct the interphonology of Brazilian EFL learners? We hypothesize BP and English phonology connect in a network to build EFL interphonology. This study discusses results presented by by Ladefoged e Manddieson (1996), Brandão (2007), Vegini (2007), Bisol (2010), Gregio (2012), Carmargos (2013) and Rennicke (2015). The poster is organized as follows: rhotic articulatory and acoustic characteristics; BP rhotics and R-variation; English rhotic and non-rhotic accents; BP and English rhotics interphonology; and conclusions. The poster emphasizes the need of a minute study of the rhotic systems associated with each language, besides hypothesizing various possibilities for Brazilian EFL learners constructing their interphonology.


## Variability in ejective production in Quechua/Spanish bilinguals in Brazil
### Carla Diaz; Eleonora Albano

Ejectives are aerodynamically complex stops occurring in only 20% of the world's languages. They occur in Quechua, but not in Spanish. In addition, their differences from the rest of the Quechua plosive inventory are still understudied. In a pilot acoustic-phonetic study conducted with Quechua-Spanish bilinguals in Brazil, we observed that: (1) the bilinguals produced the difference between the ejective and the aspirated stop with difficulty; (2) VOT was highly variable, and did not suffice to convey all the stop distinctions at stake. We sought to elucidate this phenomenon by analyzing the burst and aspiration durations, but found no clues. Variability was very high in both measures, pointing to a complex situation of language contact.
The study measured the VOT of voiceless unaspirated, aspirated and ejective stops in five Quechua/Spanish bilinguals, as well as the VOT of voiceless and voiced stops in five Spanish-monolinguals. We also investigated how bilinguals produce these phonemes in L1 and L2; and evaluated our data against models of acquisition of L2 (Speech Learning Model and Perceptual Assimilation Model) that claim that phonemes that do not exist in L1 are easier to learn in L2 (Flege & Eefting, 1987; Best &Tyler, 2007). 
Sixty words were selected and included in carrier sentences. The Quechua corpus consists of triads or minimal or analogous pairs presented in 36 sentences, including distractors. In the Spanish corpus, the words were distributed in 24 sentences, including distractors.
The results raised the question of language attrition due to Spanish dominance in the bilinguals. The statistics partly confirmed the theoretical predictions about the greater ease of producing L2 (Spanish) phonemes that do not exist in L1 (Quechua): the bilinguals easily produced the pre-voiced stops of Spanish that do not exist in Quechua (Stewart, 2015). However, the bilinguals’ difficulty in distinguishing the ejective from the aspirated stops in L1 cannot be explained by the L2 acquisition models.
Aspirated and ejective stops have similar variation coefficients. The statistics (F = 17.84, p = .013) revealed that the bilinguals only differentiate VOT between the following pairs: voiceless vs. voiced stops in Spanish, and Spanish voiceless stops vs. Quechua aspirated stops. Thus, VOT does not seem to be the only acoustic cue to distinguish these consonants, since the ejectives require several articulatory adjustments (Lindau, 1984). Possibly, other differences were masked by a pause participants tended to introduce in the carrier sentence.
In a post-hoc analysis of the interviews conducted for participant selection, we found that the bilinguals unanimously declared that they speak Spanish very fluently in all situations, but the same does not apply to Quechua. There is no doubt that language contact was intense and that Spanish exerts a great deal of pressure. The high variability of the data and the difficulty of the bilinguals to distinguish the aspirated from the ejective stops suggest that Spanish is affecting their glottal settings for ejective production. If this is confirmed by data yet to be collected, the concepts of language attrition (Ribes & Llanes, 2015) and diglossia (Wölck, 2008) may become central to of the next steps of this research.


## Early prosodic development or early musical development? Findings from Psycholinguistics and Music Psychology
### Maria de Fátima de Almeida Baia

In this study, I present a literature review on the (dis)encounters between studies of phonological development (prosodic) and studies of musical perception / learning. The aim of this ongoing study is to establish a dialogue between the two areas through a joint analysis of the prosodic development literature and musical development. For instance, prosodic development studies point out to universals in early intonational patterns (SCARPA, 1997) as the alternation between high and low tones in intonation, short melodies, binary rhythmic sequence of (un)stressed syllables, etc, whereas studies on perception and musical production of babies find specific musical intervals of each stage of development (PARIZZI, 2006). However, psycholinguistics studies, in general, observe linguistic aspects in early production/perception (SCARPA, 1997; DEMUTH, 1996; JUCSZYK, 1997) whereas studies on early musical development claim there would be “pure” musical aspects only at the beginning of development as language aspects would appear by the first year. The findings will be relevant for the practice of the music therapist who deals with both linguistic and musical aspects. 


